First draft of proof optimization guide (#3934)
dafny-lang/dafny: docs/ProofOptimization/ProofOptimization.md

Dafny provides several attributes that tell it to verify certain assertions separately, rather than verifying everything about the correctness of a particular definition in one query to the solver.

* The `{:split_here}` attribute on an `assert` statement tells Dafny to verify all assertions leading to this point in one batch and all assertions after this point (or up to the next `{:split_here}`, if there is one) in one batch.

* The `{:focus}` attribute on an `assert` or `assume` statement tells Dafny to verify all assertions in the containing block, and everything that _always_ follows it, in one batch, and the rest of the definition in another batch (potentially subject to further splitting due to other occurrences of `{:focus}`).

> * The `{:vcs_split_on_every_assert}` attribute on a definition tells Dafny to verify each assertion in that definition in its own batch. You can think of this as being similar to having many `{:focus}` or `{:split_here}` occurrences, including on assertions that arise implicitly, such as preconditions of calls or side conditions on partial operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The [`{:vcs_split_on_every_assert}`](../DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-vcs_split_on_every_assert) attribute on a definition tells Dafny to verify each assertion in that definition in its own batch. You can think of this as being similar to having many [`{:focus}`](../DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-focus) or [`{:split_here}`](../DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-split_here) occurrences, including on assertions that arise implicitly, such as preconditions of calls or side conditions on partial operations.
```

For example, an old commit in the `libraries` repository contains the following snippet:
<!-- %no-check -->
``` dafny
lemma LemmaMulEqualityAuto()
  ensures forall x: int, y: int, z: int {:trigger x * z, y * z } :: x == y ==> x * z == y * z

...

LemmaMulEqualityAuto();
assert sum * pow == (z + cout * BASE()) * pow;
```

The assertion helps Dafny figure out how to instantiate the postcondition of `LemmaMulEqualityAuto`, making the proof more efficient.

As we'll describe in more detail later, however, it can sometimes be better to avoid the quantifiers in the first place than to help Dafny instantiate them.

# Hiding information

There are several ways to structure a Dafny program to limit the number of facts that are available in scope at any particular point. First we'll go over a few that can be applied as small changes to existing programs, and then we'll cover some that are better applied early in the development process (though they can be applied to existing programs with more significant refactoring).

## Subsumption

> The default behavior of an `assert` statement is to instruct the verifier to prove that a predicate is always true and then to assume that same predicate is true in later portions of the code, making it available to help prove other facts. This is called _subsumption_. On occasion, however, you may have an `assert` statement that exists to show a desired condition for its own sake, and that does not help prove later facts. In this case, you can disable subsumption, using `assert {:subsumption 0}`, to reduce the number of facts in scope in subsequent code.

Author: They are mentioned below (in the section "Opaque specification clauses", but perhaps it would make sense to move the "Subsumption" section after that one?

One particular pattern that works well when creating general-purpose lemmas proving universal properties is to prove a parameterized version first and then use that to prove the universal version. Then, clients of the lemma can choose one or the other.

For example, consider the following two lemmas taken from the `libraries` repository.

<!-- %check-verify -->
```dafny
lemma LemmaMulEquality(x: int, y: int, z: int)
  requires x == y
  ensures x * z == y * z
{}

lemma LemmaMulEqualityAuto()
  ensures forall x: int, y: int, z: int :: x == y ==> x * z == y * z
{
  forall (x: int, y: int, z: int | x == y)
    ensures x * z == y * z
  {
    LemmaMulEquality(x, y, z);
  }
}
```

There was another instance of code in the repository where a proof began to fail after upgrading the version of Z3 included with Dafny. That code originally used `LemmaMulEqualityAuto`. We [updated it](https://github.com/dafny-lang/libraries/blob/7c386fa0b4a267715f9bd49948d1af68e1631e6b/src/dafny/Collections/LittleEndianNat.dfy#L532) to call `LemmaMulEquality` with the appropriate parameters and the proof reliably succeeded.

> In general, creating and using explicit lemmas like `LemmaMulEquality`, and skipping lemmas like `LemmaMulEqualityAuto` altogether, tends to lead to proofs with less variability. 

Reviewer: Indeed I've seen that too!

# Identifying difficult assertions

When Dafny fails to prove an assertion, it will point out the location of that assertion in the program and describe what it was trying to prove at that point.

However, when verification times out, Dafny will (by default) tell you only which definition timed out. This is similarly true in the case where a proof takes longer to complete than is practical for your development cycle. To get more fine-grained information about exactly which assertion was difficult to prove, it's possible to tell Dafny to _split_ the verification process into several batches, each of which can succeed, fail, or time out independently. This also makes independent statistics about resource use available for each batch.

Dafny provides several attributes that tell it to verify certain assertions separately, rather than verifying everything about the correctness of a particular definition in one query to the solver.

> * The [`{:split_here}`](../DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-split_here) attribute on an `assert` statement tells Dafny to verify all assertions leading to this point in one batch and all assertions after this point (or up to the next `{:split_here}`, if there is one) in one batch.

Author: I think these links will work when everything's rendered to HTML. I'm not entirely sure how to make them work both locally and in HTML.

I took that text from `Attributes.md`, and I'm honestly not entirely sure what the precise behavior is! Maybe @RustanLeino knows?

> * The [`{:split_here}`](../DafnyRef/DafnyRef#sec-split_here) attribute on an `assert` statement tells Dafny to verify all assertions leading to this point in one batch and all assertions after this point (or up to the next `{:split_here}`, if there is one) in one batch.

Reviewer 2: Happy to improve this later, it's technically correct if a bit vague, and more important to improve the description in the reference manual anyway.

ProveSomeArithmetic (correctness) (assertion batch 1),Passed,00:00:00.1880600,50027
ProveSomeArithmetic (correctness) (assertion batch 2),Passed,00:00:00.1640300,127152
ProveSomeArithmetic (correctness) (assertion batch 3),Passed,00:00:00.1389720,59361
ProveSomeArithmetic (correctness) (assertion batch 4),Passed,00:00:00.1296620,63182
ProveSomeArithmetic (correctness) (assertion batch 5),Passed,00:00:00.1232840,169237
ProveSomeArithmetic (correctness) (assertion batch 6),Passed,00:00:00.0937380,63494
ProveSomeArithmetic (correctness) (assertion batch 10),Passed,00:00:00.0774500,66869
ProveSomeArithmetic (correctness) (assertion batch 9),Passed,00:00:00.0708400,67341
ProveSomeArithmetic (correctness) (assertion batch 8),Passed,00:00:00.0644100,64792
ProveSomeArithmetic (correctness) (assertion batch 7),Passed,00:00:00.0622940,65952
```

In all of these output formats, you can see that batch 5, corresponding to the assertion about conversion to and from bit vectors, is the most expensive to prove. Later sections will go into why this is the case, and how to make proofs involving bit vectors more straightforward.

# Identifying highly variable assertions

> Sometimes, verifying a particular assertion is fast, initially, but becomes very slow (or fails) after a small change. We refer to this phenomenon as _verification variability_. The techniques in this document can help to fix proofs when it occurs. However, sometimes it would be more helpful to predict when verification of your program is highly variable, and adapt it proactively, when you can intentionally set aside time, rather than needing to fix it retroactively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes, verifying a particular assertion succeeds, initially, but fails after a small change. We refer to this phenomenon as _verification variability_. The techniques in this document can help to fix proofs when it occurs. However, sometimes it would be more helpful to predict when verification of your program is likely to be highly variable, and adapt it proactively, when you can intentionally set aside time, rather than needing to fix it retroactively.
```

Often variable "proofs" are already slow to verify.

If the time or resource count taken to verify a given assertion batch varies widely depending on the random seed, this is frequently predictive of later failure after small modifications. To measure the variation in resource use for the method from the previous section, on 10 different random seeds, we could use the following command.

```sh
$ dafny measure-complexity ProveSomeArithmetic.dfy --log-format csv --iterations 10
```

This will produce a CSV file and print out its name, as in the previous `dafny verify` case. With the `measure-complexity` command, however, each assertion batch will appear multiple times in the file. Given a CSV report containing the results of multiple iterations of verification, the [`dafny-reportgenerator`](https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny-reportgenerator) tool can perform statistical analysis on this data, and can even be used to fail a build if the statistics exceed specified bounds.

> We generally recommend keeping the coefficient of variation (a.k.a. normalized standard deviation) of the resource count under 20%. This can be enforced with the following command.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, I like that you suggest `200000` as a default resource count even if that's likely too low for serious codebases - I'd rather suggest too low than too high. :)

> We generally recommend keeping the coefficient of variation (a.k.a. normalized standard deviation) of the resource count under 20%. This can be enforced with the following command.

Author: It's just a little above the maximum value in the CSV file shown. :) That's generally how I do things: set the maximum a little above where things are now, to make sure they don't get worse, and try to ratchet it down if possible.

If you have a difficult non-linear fact to prove, and proving it from the ground up is infeasible, it is possible, as a last resort, to adjust how Z3 attempts to prove arithmetic formulas. It contains a parameter, `smt.arith.solver`, that allows you to choose between one of six different arithmetic decision procedures. Dafny has historically used solver "2", and continues to do so by default. This peforms most effectively on the corpus of examples that we have experimented with. However, solver "6", which is the default for Z3 when not being invoked from Dafny, performs better at non-linear arithmetic. Currently, it's possible to choose this solver using the Dafny flag `--boogie /proverOpt:O:smt.arith.solver=6` (or just `/proverOpt:O:smt.arith.solver=6`, when not using top-level commands).

## Relationships between integers and bit vectors

Dafny contains two distinct ways to describe what might be stored in a machine word in other programming languages.

> * The `int` type denotes the unbounded mathematical integers.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps mention that in practice you'd use a bounded `newtype` and not `int` directly, especially since then you really are directly equivalent with the bit vector option.

Making definitions opaque can be particularly important when they are recursive or involve quantifiers. Because of the considerations around quantifiers described earlier, hiding quantified formulas until they're needed can be very important for improving performance and reducing variability.

## Opaque specification clauses

In addition to top-level definitions, assertions, preconditions, postconditions, and loop invariants can be made opaque. If you add a label to any instance of one of these contstructs, it will be hidden by default and only available when explicitly revealed.

For example, consider the following method with an opaque precondition.

<!-- %check-verify -->
```dafny
method OpaquePrecondition(x: int) returns (r: int)
  requires P: x > 0
  ensures r > 0
{
  r := x + 1;
  assert r > 0 by { reveal P; }
}
```

## Subsumption

> The default behavior of an `assert` statement is to instruct the verifier to prove that a predicate is always true and then to assume that same predicate is true in later portions of the code, making it available to help prove other facts. This is called _subsumption_. On occasion, however, you may have an `assert` statement that exists to show a desired condition for its own sake, and that does not help prove later facts. In this case, you can [disable subsumption](../DafnyRef/DafnyRef#1133-subsumption-n), using `assert {:subsumption 0} P`, to reduce the number of facts in scope in subsequent code. This is similar to `assert L: P`, except that in the case of a labeled assertion the predicate can be selectively revealed later. If you know you'll _never_ need `P`, rather than _usually_ not needing it, subsumption could be a better option.

Reviewer 2: Thanks, the expanded description is just as good as an example.

For example, consider the following two lemmas taken from the `libraries` repository.

<!-- %check-verify -->
```dafny
lemma LemmaMulEquality(x: int, y: int, z: int)
  requires x == y
  ensures x * z == y * z
{}

lemma LemmaMulEqualityAuto()
  ensures forall x: int, y: int, z: int :: x == y ==> x * z == y * z
{
  forall (x: int, y: int, z: int | x == y)
    ensures x * z == y * z
  {
    LemmaMulEquality(x, y, z);
  }
}
```

There was another instance of code in the repository where a proof began to fail after upgrading the version of Z3 included with Dafny. That code originally used `LemmaMulEqualityAuto`. We [updated it](https://github.com/dafny-lang/libraries/blob/7c386fa0b4a267715f9bd49948d1af68e1631e6b/src/dafny/Collections/LittleEndianNat.dfy#L532) to call `LemmaMulEquality` with the appropriate parameters and the proof reliably succeeded.

In general, creating and using explicit lemmas like `LemmaMulEquality`, and skipping lemmas like `LemmaMulEqualityAuto` altogether, tends to lead to proofs with less variability. 

> ## Adding triggers

Reviewer 2: I would explicitly flag this as a last resort, and perhaps even say if you find you HAVE to use triggers you should reach out to us to provide a better solution.

## Smaller, more isolated definitions

As a general rule, designing a program from the start so that it can be broken into small pieces with clearly-defined interfaces is helpful for human understanding, flexibility, maintenance, and ease of verification. More specific instances of this include the following.

* Break large functions into smaller functions, especially when they're ghost functions, and make at least some of them opaque. I often consider a ghost function of more than a handful of lines to be a code smell. There are exceptions where larger functions are necessary, or the most straightforward alternative, though, such when handling all of the many cases of a complex algebraic data type.

* Prove lemmas about functions rather than having numerous or complex postconditions. The individual lemmas can then be invoked only when needed, and other facts that are true but irrelevant will not bog down the solver.

> * Break methods up into smaller pieces, as well. Because methods are always opaque, this will, in many cases, require adding a contract to each broken-out method. To make this more tractable, consider abstracting the concepts used in those contracts into separate functions, some of which may be opaque. 

Reviewer 2: I think such a detailed and multi-faceted document deserves a concluding section, especially just to list all the individual techniques for quick reference.
